[MUSIC]
>> Jafar Husain: Why
are observables important?
Why are they powerful?
And you should learn them.
Well it's quite simple.
Almost every UI,
when you do some interaction with it,
you see the same progression.
You listen for an event,
the user does something,
then you might make an asynchronous
request right to the server and
then maybe follow up with an animation.
Observable is capable of modeling
all three of these things.
So if you model all three of these actions
as an Observable in your user interface,
you can then use the functions that I'm
gonna be teaching you guys about today
to compose them together seamlessly.
There with very, very little code.
And so that's why observable
is powerful and important.
It's capable of modeling all of the three
most common actions that you see,
asynchronous actions,
you see in user interfaces.
So in order to get
the observable type today,
I'll be using the reactive
extensions library.
it's a library that you
can grab out there.
It's an Open Source Apache2 library,
and what it is,
is it introduces observable type but then
it also defines all of the array methods
I'm gonna be teaching today and
many many more over the observable types.
So you can use those methods to compose
together observables instead of
arrays.
>> Jafar Husain: So
this is a site where you can go to grab it
but it will be included in the exercise
you do later see don't need
to worry about too much.
Now, the problem is we have
all these old async APIs,
these weird shaped async APIs out there.
The DOM API is one of them and our goal,
the first thing we need to do is we
need to be able to take all
of these weird async APIs and
adapt them into observables.
And the observable library comes with some
helpful functions to help you do that.
So for example, the fromEvent function,
will take a DOM event and
the name,
excuse me will take a DOM object and
the name of the DOM event and
adapt it into an observable.
And so then now you can
forEach over that observable,
which is exactly the same as doing it
add event lesser, move event lesser.
So let's take a living example.
So we want to take all of
these different APIs and
adapt them into one common interface
capable of modeling all of them.
So here is how you subscribe to an event,
hopefully most of us are familiar
with this process, right?
We take an event handler and
we add it to some DOM node, in this case
that I'm using the document but it could
be a button, it could be a link tag.
And so we give it the name of,
I think I made a typo there,
it should be mousemove not mousemoves, but
we give it the name of an event and
then we associate with it a call back.
And then every single time a mouse move or
in this case happens that callback gets
invoked and that event object describing
information about the mousemove is
pushed at us, right, by our callback.
Now here's how you would do the exact
same thing with an observable.
So, you can take any observable,
that observable that we adopted
from a DOM event for example.
And you can just forEach over it and
accomplish exactly the same thing.
We're passing in a function, which gets
invoked for every item in the observable.
And what comes out though is this
subscription object, this is where
the observables forEach method
differs from an arrays forEach method.
Remember that in arrays forEach method,
when you do forEach over an array it's
gonna complete synchronously,
immediately, right?
forEach is gonna run through all
the items in the array and finish.
Not so with an observable,
because remember an observable is
a collection that arrives over time and so
when you forEach over an observable, it's
not like when you just block and wait for
all the data to arrive and
then just block the system.
We don't wanna block in fact.
So what a forEach does it actually it
doesn't block it completes immediately but
then as the observable items in
the observable arrive over time,
that function gets invoked.
So it's just like a DOM event
where you hook up a handler, and
then immediately you're not blocking,
and then if those mouse moves arrive,
it gets pushed to your handler.
Now if your forEach over data, right,
because this goes on for a very,
very long time, you might decide that
you don't care about that data anymore.
You might decide just like you stop
listening for mouse moves for example,
you might decide you don't care about
the data coming out of observable and so
we need some way to
unsubscribe from an observable.
And that's why the forEach
method on an observable,
not an array,
returns this subscription object.
So if you decide you don't want
to receive messages anymore,
that's one thing I forgot to call out
earlier which is with an observable,
the consumer should be able to say look,
I don't care about those messages.
That's different than
the producer saying done.
There's no more stream.
There's no more data coming.
The consumer can say, you know I
don't care if there's more data.
I just don't listen anymore, right?
That's the equivalent calling
remove that listener or
here calling the dispose
method on the subscription.
So the the previous slide and this slide
were really doing exactly the same thing,
observable hasn't added any value.
It's doing the same thing that
you would do with a DOM event.
It's this next slide where we're gonna
demonstrate the value that observable
adds over and above as a DOM API
event listener interface.
Yep?
>> Speaker 2: Question,
is there any plans to add
observable in ES7, or
any of the ES.next?
>> Jafar Husain: Yes,
as a matter of a fact, there's a proposal
in place right now for ES7, or,
technically called now, ES2016, which
would add observable to the language.
So this is definitely something that you
might see you in JavaScript in the future.
It's just in the early processes, so
no guarantees, but regardless of whether
it makes in the language or not, there's
nothing stopping you from using a library.
>> Speaker 3: Just the water bottle making
a lot of noise.
>> Jafar Husain: Absolutely.
>> Speaker 3: Sorry about that
>> Jafar Husain: Yes, and so
the answer is yes.
There is an attempt by myself and
a few others to get observable
into JavaScript language.
So now we see those two missing
semantics that I talked about earlier.
The two things that were missing from the
observable pattern that the Gang of Four
described 20 years ago.
Which is a way for the producer to give
the information to the consumer that
an error occurred or a way for
the producer to give the information
to the consumer that no more
data is arriving, right?
So, the first event handler here is for
receiving data, right?
That's just like the adamant listener,
callback that you hand to the DOM event.
But these next two callbacks are optional.
This callback receives an arrow,
remember arrow means function guys.
I know a little bit tough to
remember the new syntax but
all of this is just a function which
accepts an heir and then does something,
in this case we just put
it out to the console.
And then beneath that, there's
a function with, this is the syntax for
a function that accepts no arguments.
So this is a function that
accepts no arguments.
This whole function just
gets invoked as a way for
the producer to tell the consumer,
no more data.
That's why it accepts no arguments.
We just call that function to tell
the consumer no more data is arriving.
Does that make sense?
So here are the two missing semantics
that are there with aerator right?
When you call next and it says done
true or when you call next it throws
that we've now added to push streams
by this observable interface.
So here's how you can get pushed
the information that an error happen or
get pushed the information that well
there's no more data in the stream,
that make sense, yeah question?
Is this forEach?
>> Speaker 2: Could you have added any
number of functions there or is this
really specific forEach that excepts up to
three?
>> Jafar Husain: Specific forEach that
except up to three cuz we're trying to
create the same semantics for push streams
while you're receiving information
pushed back to you that we have for
iterators, where you're pulling
information out, and so
when you're pulling information out of
an array, you can either get a value.
You can attempt to pull information out
by calling next, and it can throw, so
you can get an error, or you can pull
a value out and that done can be true,
telling you that there's no more data.
Here, we're trying to create the same
semantics the other way around.
So if I'm pushing you information,
I should be able to also tell you
that an error happened, or tell you
that there's no more data coming, and
that's what those last two functions do.
So you provide, it's like,
so think of an observable
provisionally while you're trying to
get your head around the concept.
Think of observable as like a DOM event,
where you can pass three
handlers instead of one.
And those last two handlers tell
you whether an error occurred,
or whether there's just no more data
coming along, is that makes sense?
So observable right now, the mental model
I want to use is all is the observable
is like a little like an event
that's a first class object
that you can give three event handlers to,
instead of one.
So technically if we, this is,
it is also just shorthand for this.
You actually give it an object.
This is what we call an observer object.
So those three callbacks
are actually just shorthand for
providing an object with three callbacks,
on next, on air, and on completed, right?
And then the observable accepts
an observer and invokes onNext,
onNext, onNext,
onNext until it invokes either onError or
onCompleted, is that make sense?
It doesn't call on air and
then all uncompleted, right?
It will either just tell
you an error occurred and
that means that the stream has ended.
No more data's coming
because an error occurred.
Just like when you throw in a function.
That function's not going to
suddenly return a value, right?
When you throw inside the function,
it's done.
So that's how the observable works.
You've got an observable.
You, if you wanna consume the data inside
of an observable, create this little
object with three handlers, you hand
the observer object to an observable.
The observable pushes data
into the observer object and
by extension your callbacks.
And it'll call onnext,
0 to n number of times followed by
either an on air, or an uncompleted.
It might actually never call onError
onCompleted because some stream is
gone forever.
MouseMoves, you would
never get on error or
on completed call, if your observable was
just wrapping a mouseMove event, right?
Because that's a stream
that just goes on forever.
It's perfectly okay to have
an observable that goes on forever.
Question?
>> Speaker 2: Just question about,
can you still align it
declares mouseMoves?
Is that a new observable?
>> Jafar Husain: It's right back here.
So we actually created it by using
a function provided with the Rx library,
to help you adapt an event
into an observable.
I wanna see this the actual definition
of this function in just a moment.
This fromEvent function which can
take any DOM event and event name and
combine them and
create an observable type.
Is that makes sense?
So it's just the same, and
we're just adapting the interface.
So when you call forEach on mouse moves,
under the hood,
it's adding in the event listener to
the mouse move event on the DOM object.
So we're gonna see how this
works in just a moment.
Yep, do you have a question?
Sorry.
>> Speaker 2: No nothing came up online or
anything.
Do those events or the function have
to be in that order next onError,
onCompleted?
>> Jafar Husain: Not here, so
in this particular overload when you're
passing in, it allows you to pass
in either a collection of like not
a collection, but it allows you passing
either arguments that are functions or
you can pass in this object, right?
So if you wanna be able to
specify them in any order,
you can pass on the object because
that's just name value pairs there,
so you can rearrange
that however you want.
But today for
most of our exercises, we'll just be using
this form where we just passed functions.
And in this case, yes it is order
because it's based on argument order.
So you get on the next function,
first the air function second and
the completion function last.
Does that make sense?